a little bit about you and your history, and what
year did you begin reporting and anchoring? In
Houston, essentially, I started in 1961. I came
here. Dan Rather was at Channel 11 at that time, and
I was in Tulsa. And they brought two people down
from the Tulsa station to work down here, and I was
one of the people brought down. He was my boss. And
he became famous, of course, with Carla. And that
was in September. In May the following year, he
left to go to CBS. And so I worked with him for that
period of time and learned a great deal from him
about writing. But there were essentially three
news stations in town, KPRC, Channel 2, KHOU,
Channel 11, KTRK, Channel 13. Channel 8 was on the
air, but that was it. And 8 didn't do any news. So
there were three news stations. And 2 was the
dominant station. until the hurricane came, put
Rather on the map, but also put Eleven on the map.
And Eleven stayed number one for, I'd say, about
eight or ten years. Then 13's dominance came into
play and remains there now, though we're just
about to beat them, and I think we probably will. If
we don't get them now, we'll get them very shortly.
What year did Channel 2 begin operation?
I think 2 is 35 years old, so I think... I think they
were on the air in the 50s, something like that. But
I'm not really sure. Not very many viewers, not
many people had TV. No, that was a situation where
traditionally the NBC station was the first
station in the market because NBC radio had a kind
of dominance, and RCA was making electronics
equipment for television, so they stocked NBC
stations first. And people would go down to the
supermarkets or not supermarket, to the store,
like a Foley store, and look in the window. You'd
see them gathered around the front window to watch
television. It was a very unique situation. Then
pretty soon got to where everybody got one of their
house, then color came. First the cable came to
bring you live programs, and then color came, and
then now VCRs, and the industry keeps changing.
One of the reasons it's been interesting, it's
been a very fluid industry. It always changes. It
may seem to be the same to the guy at home, But
internally, it's changing every day. You can't
keep up with it. What kind of stories would I see if I
were a viewer in 1960? Same kind of stories you see
now, except probably more emphasis on crime,
because crime's easier to do. The reason you see so
much crime on television and so much crime on
radio, and essentially so much crime in
newspapers, is because it's an easy thing to
cover. There's a body. There's a police car.
There's a light going around that attracts people
to it. There are people around gathering.
Everybody's got an idea as to what happened or what
might have happened, whether it was an automobile
accident or a shooting or a robbery. Well, crime
may be visual, but is the crime rate increasing?
Crime rate increases, I think, with the general
population. I think that is a fact. And there
probably is more crime now than there was in the
1950s because there are more of us. And certainly
in Houston, there's more crime because we have
created a, I don't know what you want to call it,
that we've created down there. When I came to
Houston in 1961, there 600,000, 700,000 people.
Now you've got in that same tight area that's
uninhabitable. Anybody who had any sense
wouldn't live there in the first place because
it's not a fit place to live. Too hot. It's too
everything. So now we've got 3 million people in
there. So yes, there's more crime. Television
didn't do that. Radio didn't do that. News papers
didn't do that. Do you see crime being committed
more violently than in the 60s? I began as a police
reporter, and I saw people shocked, stabbed,
choked, and gassed. And I've seen a couple of
people electrocuted in the electric chair. I
don't see, I don't know that you get more violent
than that. I think because of the perception is,
because of what television is doing, what mass
media is doing, is that there seems to be a much more
violent attitude about people now than we always
had. But you have to understand, there's a good
side to television. maybe, and that is in the
1960s, television may have showed us that war is
really hell. I mean, MacArthur said it was, and
Harry Truman said it was, but nobody really
believed that much because it was really John
Wayne, wasn't it? It was what we saw at the movies on
Saturday. Television brought the living room war
to us, and we haven't had a major confrontation of
the war since Vietnam. Maybe we won't have. I don't
know. But before that, we had World War II and World
War I and the Spanish-American War and the Civil
War. And we had inquisitions in Europe, and we had
seven crusades. And man has not figured out a more
violent way to be than man was then. Excellent.
Thank you, Roger. You're very welcome, Ron. Yeah,
you're quite welcome. Very historical. Yes.
When you worked there at KPRC in 1960, were there as
many female reporters then as there are now? No,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Jessica Savage came in
the 60s, and I can't recall exactly when she came.
Jessica Savage and Bob Nicholas were both hired
the same week. Now, that's a significant thing
because Bob Nicholas is black. And Jessica Savage
is a woman. And the community was pretty much
decided that neither one of them had the right to
give them the news. I mean, certainly a woman had no
business giving the news. And what year was this?
Well, sometime in the 60s. I don't know exactly
when it was. 60s, 70s, maybe 70s. I don't know. I
lose track of time. You know, when you get my age,
things fly by. But in that age, it was very
controversial. Oh, yeah. You know, Jess did the
Saturday night news. Bob did the Sunday night
news. And people said, we're never going to watch
your weekends again on Channel 11. That's where it
was at that time. Because you've got a black man on
there. God knows black people don't have any
sense. You've got a woman on there. God knows women
don't have any sense. Who hired these? The
management of the television station at that
time, the Corinthian Broadcasting Company, made
the decision that the time had come to make a
gigantic leap into modern times and did this. I
suppose a man named Jim Riddsdale was the man who
did it. The news director was a fellow named Dick
John. It was a very radical first time. Yes. We got
death threats. We got threats from sponsors that
they were going to quit watching, going to quit
doing these things, going to quit sponsoring the
programs. And in the end, of course, it all worked
out very well. Now I think 40% of the newsrooms
around the country, newspapers and radio and
television stations, are women. They're being
paid the same amount of money that men are being
paid. They're doing the same kind of jobs. They're
probably doing it better. which is a terrible
thing to admit, but the fact is they have a sense of
propriety, a sense of understanding how things go
together in an orderly way, which makes a good
reporter. A good reporter ought to know how to
orderly put things together. A woman maybe knows
that instinctively. Maybe God gave them that kind
of instinct to know how to manage things. So
they're pretty good managers and thus pretty good
reporters. And I want to say they have And forgive
me for using gutter words, but they've got just as
many balls as men have, and that's a great shock to
those of us who are men. Is Jan Carson
characteristic of those qualities? Absolutely.
Absolutely. Yeah, she's tough. She's
attractive. If you want somebody to be
attractive, she's attractive. She's tough. If
you want somebody to be tough, she can sit down and
write a news story as well as I can and better. Does
TV emphasize now the glamour? Always have. More
than it has in the past. Television started in the
beginning. People watched television
not because they thought they were going to learn
any great new things. They were going to see some
things on the newsreel that they had not
previously seen, open up the wide vistas that way.
But you had John Cameron Swayze read the Camel News
Caravan. That was the very first thing. It was just
wonderful. And the guy, I can't think of his name,
who did CBS, the first CBS newscast now, he's
Robert Kraut, another handsome guy with a
mustache. People thought that that's the way it
was supposed to be, just an attractive guy sitting
there reading the news, and that was it. We got past
attractive guys reading the news, but they were
still accused of flash and trash. But it's still
there, just like it's still there in newspapers. I
don't suppose the Post or the Chronicle started
putting color in their newspapers because they
knew that that was going to enhance the value of the
news. They knew that if they put that in there,
people might pick it up and look at it. It's a
business. It's a business. And television's a
business, and don't you ever forget that. Don't
let anybody tell you it isn't, because if they tell
you that, it's a lie. Newspapers are a business. We
don't exist for any other reason than to make
somebody money. Now, because we can make somebody
money, we also can do things that we ought to be
doing, and we do things for the community. At our
station, at every television station, they do
things for the community that the community
doesn't even realize. They run They run spots for
the Leukemia Society free. It doesn't cost
anything to run those public service
announcements. That's part of the thing they said
they'd do to get the license. They put fringe
programs on the air maybe in weird times when no
one's watching, but they put programs on the air
that give people exposure to how the other half
lives, which is very valuable and very good.
Newspapers do the same thing. Radio does the same
thing. So you can gripe all you want to about it
being a business, and we're really in there, oh, we
care about the ratings. You bet. I care about the
ratings. So I got a good enough rating to get to work
tomorrow. It's as simple a thing as that. The guy
here at Foley's worries about the ratings, see?
His rating is a cash register. If he sells enough in
the camera department, he'll get to sell cameras
tomorrow. At Texas A&M, if a teacher teaches well
enough and produces good enough results from his
classroom, he'll get to teach next year. It's a
struggle to survive. It's survival of the
fittest. That's what ratings are. I'm old before
my time because I worry about who watched last
night. I worry about those numbers. I want to know
when I get to work today what my numbers were last
night. I really want to know. Can those numbers be
trusted? Are they reliable? Let's assume that you
wanted to play a game of craps. You really want to
shoot dice somewhere, and there's only one crap
game in town. You're probably going to go and
someone will say, well, what if they're loaded?
But I don't know whether they're loaded or not. If
I'm going to play the game, that's the only place to
go to play. The only way you can tell what's
happening in television is by a ratings thing that
may or may not be loaded. But it's the only way to
check. Not the best, but the only. It's the only way
anybody's come up with. It'd be really wonderful
if they could see if you put a little thing on front
of your television set and you turn it on and it
says, well, somebody was watching Channel 2 last
night. No, it doesn't. It says the television set
was on Channel 2 last night. It doesn't say whether
they watched. It doesn't say whether they
listened. It doesn't say whether they learned
anything. We don't know how to measure that. Okay.
Do you think that TV news directors overemphasize
the graphics and the glamour and the live shots?
Yeah, they're interested in that sort of thing
because it all goes together in a kind of package
just like the editor of a newspaper probably
overemphasizes the graphics. At the expense of
truth in journalism? No, those things don't have
anything to do with each other. If you believe
that, then that's to say that you couldn't have an
attractive picture of the Pope behind you as
you're talking about the Pope. and that you
somehow would be cheapening the pulp or
cheapening the story. That doesn't make a
difference. Graphics are used in every form of
business, in every form of teaching. There's
always been somebody who had a graph. There's
always somebody who had a picture to explain how
something worked. If television does the same
thing, what's wrong with that? It's a teaching
tool. I can say, I did a story the other night about
the wind shear that the airplane ran into at
Dallas. Well, I know what wind shear was. I mean,
I've heard the word. Most of my viewers have heard
the word, but they don't know what it is. So the
artist people did a thing of a down, you know, an
arrow. They did a cloud with an airplane in it and an
arrow coming down at it like a gust of wind. Now,
that's flash, okay? But it also helps somebody
say, oh, that's what a wind shear is, a sudden wind
that comes down and hits the front of the airplane
and makes it crash. Now, The question is, could we
tell the story without it? And the answer is yes.
The question is, could we tell it as effectively?
And the answer is, maybe not. Well, does it cheapen
the story and bring it down to an elementary level?
You've got to understand that the average person
that we're talking to is not a college graduate. Is
that insulting to the average viewer? No, I don't
think so. It's not insulting to me if someone, if I
pick up something and I say, well, I understand
that. It doesn't insult me. If I pick up a
newspaper, and I go back to newspapers because I
read newspapers all the time, lots of newspapers,
and I enjoy them. USA Today doesn't insult me
because it has a graph telling how many people chew
gum on Thursday. I just think, who cares? But
somebody does, you see. If the story next to it is a
good story about how the deficit is affecting the
balance of trade, then that doesn't bother me at
all. And if they have a little graph that shows a
ship docking and guys carrying stuff off the ship
and putting things back on there as they have done
to explain what the balance of trade is. It doesn't
insult my intelligence, and it may help somebody
to understand what this thing's all about. Okay.
Let's draw some differences between newspaper
and TV. Okay. Does TV suffer from its inadequacy to
reach deep down, bring the details out? Yeah. We
have a time problem. We have time constraints that
we simply cannot get around. I bet. 30 minutes of
news. You have a 30-minute segment. How many
minutes of news do you have? 12 to 13 minutes of news
in it. That's not counting weather and sports and
commercials. That's very small. Oh, yeah. It's
not very much time at all. So you become an editor,
and you say, I'm going to tell them about this and
such. You get to play God. That's one of the worst
things about the whole thing, is the producer,
anchor, gets to play God a little bit. And you go
home every night wondering if you were the right
kind of God today. All right. Houston, the market
you work in, the 10th-rated market, is the
competition stiff? Yeah, very much so. Yeah, I
think so. There's a lot of money involved in it.
See, we make a lot of money in the television
business. And when you've got a lot of money
involved, you have terrible competition for that
dollar so that you can't afford to let down because
somebody's after you every time you get a rating
point. If we beat 13, you see, we charge more money
for what we sell a spot for in that newspaper. We
sell eight spots in it now, see. What are some of the
magic tricks that producers use to boost the
ratings? Well, they try to put special reports in
during rating periods, you know, blockbuster
reports on what happened, you know, this story,
that story, whatever it might be. They try to
infuse as many of those in as they possibly can. get
promotable things in a newscast, promotable
features in a newscast. Dan Carson is now working
on a cosmetic surgery piece, which is fluff. But
you know if you advertise the fact that tonight
we're going to show you a breast implant, you might
get somebody to watch your newscast. Chances are
you're going to get somebody to watch your
newscast. 13, I mean 11, two years ago during those
glory days of Amanda Arnold, did a whole
month-long series on sexual attitudes in
Houston. We knew everybody's sexual attitude. I
couldn't care less. But I had a lot of people say,
what do you think about the way 50-year-old women
think about sex? And I'd say, what? You watch for
that? And they'd say, well, sure. I wanted to know.
And I'm thinking, oh, it'd be a shoe sale.
Well, that gets back to the viewers. and their
response to the news. Why do you think some viewers
think TV news blows stories out of proportion?
Because in the first place, it's very personal. It
comes into their house, and they see it. If they see
the story on, let's assume there was, let's shoot
somebody at a school, OK? 2, 11, 13 are going to
shoot somebody, they're going to have a film on
that at 5 o'clock, 6 o'clock, 10 o'clock. Okay? The
numbers. So, you know, they have, maybe they've
blown it out of proportion. Maybe it shouldn't
have been that big a story in the first place. But
it's the story. In Philadelphia last night at a
shopping mall, a woman dressed in army fatigues
walks in with a gun and starts shooting. She shoots
13 or 14 people and kills two of them. That's going
to be on every television station in
Philadelphia. and in every newspaper in
Philadelphia for a couple of days, and it's going
to be an overkill kind of a situation. So there you
go. I've got to go do my work here. Oh, okay. Okay.
Can I come back in a second? I think that wraps it up.
Yeah, that's fine. Great. Thank you very much.